---
layout: blog
title: "Books About Dogs"
---

<h2><a href="{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}">{{ page.title }}</a></h2>

<em style="color: gray; font-size: smaller">
  {{ page.date | date_to_long_string }}</em>

My partner and I adopted a dog this past May.  In the lead-up to, and since,
I've read a bunch of books about dog psychology and training.  Some were
invaluable, and caused us to make much better decisions than we would have
otherwise.  Others were simply entertaining or thought provoking, without
being directly prescriptive.  These are some brief reviews with
recommendations for anyone who finds them useful.

Quick links:

- <a href="#leash">The Other End of the Leash</a> – Patricia McConnell, PhD
- <a href="#monks">The Art of Raising a Puppy and How to Be Your Dog’s Best Friend</a> – The Monks of New Skete 
- <a href="#after">After You Get Your Puppy</a> – Dr. Ian Dunbar
- <a href="#perfect">How to Raise the Perfect Dog</a> – Cesar Millan 
- <a href="#clash">The Culture Clash</a> – Jean Donaldson


<a name="leash"></a>

### <a target="_blank" href="http://www.patriciamcconnell.com/store/The-Other-End-of-the-Leash.html"><em>The Other End of the Leash</em></a>

This was the most well-written of the books I read, the one I'd recommend most
to a non-dog-owner, and also the book we probably use the least in our
day-to-day with Ada.  It's a fun read because Patricia McConnell is clearly an
accomplished animal behaviorist, and also a great writer.  She weaves in an
understanding of many different animals' tendencies and behavior, often based
in her own research, to paint a nice picture of her view of dogs' perspective
on the world.

Her observations of her own dogs are fascinating and fun to read.  They are
also difficult to adapt to other situations unless you also happen to own four
dogs and live on a farm.  The descriptions of training activities are often
too situational or not specific enough to be useful, to the point where I
think the book could be improved by removing them.  It's an excellent book for
giving the reader a window into the canine reality, but doesn't have much
information that I found particularly actionable.  That said, if you're
reading this and you aren't a dog owner (or are one, and just looking for a
fun read), give it a shot.


<a name="monks"></a>

### <a target="_blank" href="https://www.newskete.com/shopdisplayproducts.asp?id=26&cat=Exceptional+Dog+Books"><em>The Art of Raising a Puppy</em> and <em>How to Be Your Dog's Best Friend</em></a>

Both of these books are written by the Monks of the New Skete monastery, a
place that focuses on breeding and raising exclusively German Shepherds.  The
two books blur together a little bit in my memory, which may say something
about the relative value of reading one after having read the other.  I
remember a few things most vividly from _The Art_:

- The extremely explicit puppy crate training schedule.  This single page,
  which lists the times to crate a puppy, when to have it out, and when to
  feed and offer water, is the most-opened page in the book and is still
  dog-eared.  It was useful mostly because it was _prescriptive_ amongst a sea
  of sometimes overly _descriptive_ prose.  Over the course of dog ownership,
  perspective on dogs' experiences and descriptions of their general behavior
  and temperament is useful.  But when raising Ada in the first month or so,
  all I wanted was to be told _what_ to do in some cases.  The detailed
  schedule was useful for that.

- The suggestion of putting puppies on enforced down-stays during meal times
  and other quiet times (like movie times).  Enforced here means, at first,
  having the dog on a leash or holding your hand hovering over them to make
  them stay in place even when they try to get up (they get rewarded for
  staying in place for various durations).  This was a great idea; forcing Ada
  to go to her crate while eating, or stay in her bed while we work on the
  couch, saved us a ton of headaches, and got Ada a lot of treats once she
  figured out the game.

- Holding a dog's mouth shut as a form of feedback and punishment when play
  gets too rough.  We actually used this one when Ada was little and still
  play-biting people to let her know when it wasn't OK.  But we learned more
  on the topic from Ian Dunbar's book, discussed below.

Probably the most notable other feature of the book was the section on
physical punishment.  The notable thing about it is that the monks _used to_
recommend flipping a dog on its back as part of a dominance display, and in
the updated version have explicit bold text renouncing this practice.
Interestingly, they still recommend grabbing dogs by their scruff, using sharp
leash corrections, and hitting the dog on the chin in extreme cases.  We don't
do these (I didn't trust myself to get the dexterity bit of the leash
correction “pop” right), and the trainers we've met roundly reject them as bad
ideas.  I wonder if more bold text will appear in future editions.

<a name="after"></a>

### <a href="http://www.dogstardaily.com/storefront/after-you-get-your-puppy" target="_blank">After You Get Your Puppy</a>

This book, by Ian Dunbar, was a terrific resource.  It is a great resource for
planning out and managing the first few months with a new puppy.  With the
exception of the section on potty training, which interestingly _didn't_
emphasize crate training like every other resource we found, we followed
essentially all the advice of this book.  Given that Ada is a sample size of
one, it's hard to say what would have happened in some cases if we hadn't
followed the book's advice, so take my experience with a pinch of salt.

This book harped on two things as far and away the most important activities
in raising a puppy: socialization, which I expected, and _bite control_, which
I didn't at all.

- As far as socialization goes, the main useful point this book makes is that
  it is effectively impossible to oversocialize a puppy, and socialization
  with people and dogs (in that order of importance) is the first priority
  with a dog.  In a single day or hour it may be possible to overstimulate a
  puppy (if, say, 25 small children try to pet the pup), but there is only
  increasing gains from finding as many situations as possible to expose a
  puppy to early on.  Getting this exposure, Dunbar claims (and I'm inclined
  to believe), is super important for raising a dog that can integrate new
  experiences into its life later on.

- Bite control wasn't something I was expecting to think about when I got a
  puppy, nor the method Dunbar proposes.  I kind of assumed that I'd have a
  Good Dog that didn't bite because we loved it enough, and that would be
  that.  Still, it made so much sense that I can't help but think it's a good
  idea.

  The basic practice is two stages: first, make sure your dog has a _soft
  mouth_ when they bite, and second, wean them off biting altogether.
  
  It seems to be a fact of nature that puppies are hard-wired to play-bite
  people.  It's just something they do.  They also don't “know” how strong
  their bite is, and are wired to learn to weaken their bite in response
  to negative feedback.  Dunbar's recommendation is to play with your pup with
  your hands, and let them bite you.  When they do a bite that's harder than
  the others, yelp in pain (even if it didn't hurt), and stop playing.  The
  play-break is the punishment.  Do this for decreasing intensities of bite,
  and the pup learns that biting has to be soft, or the game stops.  It's not
  totally clear to me how this mouth-softness interacts with an actually
  fearful dog biting in defense or aggression, but it does make sure that when
  a dog is playing with a 8-year-old, if she decides to play-bite, her
  play-bite won't ever break skin with its own force.

  Once a dog has a soft enough mouth that you barely feel the play bites, you
  can start stopping play altogether if teeth ever make contact with skin.
  This is included in most of the recommended “rules” for playing tug-of-war
  with dogs as well.  But Dunbar makes the point clear that the goal is first
  a soft bite, then no biting at all, so that the dog has been trained
  explicitly in restraining its bite force.

_After You Get Your Puppy_ also comes with a useful appendix of socialization
activities and checklists.  Unless your job is raising dogs full-time, I don't
think it's possible to meet the goals laid out (I don't know enough children
under 12 to have introduced Ada to 5 a week or whatever was recommended; it
felt like a lot), but it's extremely useful as inspiration for the
_categories_ of situations you should introduce the puppy to in its first few
months.

<a name="perfect"></a>

### <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Raise-Perfect-Through-Puppyhood-Beyond/dp/0307461300">How to Raise the Perfect Dog</a>


This was Cesar Millan's (of _Dog Whisperer_ fame) book.  The main thread I
remember from this book was the importance of a calm, confident attitude when
working with dogs.  It also recommended _bully sticks_, which are quite
possibly the grossest but most effective reward for Ada (they are,
essentially, 6" or 12" lengths of dried, stretched bull penis).  Using them as
lures or rewards is pretty much the main way we get her to do uncomfortable
things like sit still while we clean her ears or clip her nails.

<a name="clash"></a>

### <a href="https://www.dogwise.com/ItemDetails.cfm?ID=DTB1291" target="_blank">The Culture Clash</a>

I read this most recently (after owning Ada for 8 months).  I found it to be
the best of the bunch.  It is unrelenting in a few of its key points, most of
which revolve around breaking down what Jean Donaldson calls “the Disney
dog” who is intrinsically loyal and good.

- Dogs are <em>a</em>moral.  They do what works to get what they want.  What
  they want is fleeting and constantly changing between individuals (much like
  humans), but food and attention are usually pretty good (much like humans).
  They _don't_ plan beyond a few minutes' time, unconditionally love their
  owners, or even have a concept of what it means to “please” them, beyond
  Good Things happening to dogs as a result.  One way to put this is to point
  out that, a dog's internal model of a human's emotions is unlikely to be
  much better than our model of dogs'.
- An owner is in control of a dog's food, shelter, and access to
  entertainment.  This should be all the advantage needed to motivate and
  train one; in particular, prong collars and shock devices are overkill given
  the owner's already considerable advantage.
- The first, most important, step in training a dog comes from finding what
  motivates it, in what preference order.  This varies between dogs.  But once
  a dog's (sometimes contextual) motivators are found, little stops the
  trainer from manipulating the hierarchy of motivators to get whatever
  behavior they want out of the dog.
- Just because dogs are amoral doesn't mean they aren't interesting, smart, or
  worth making part of your family.  It's just that applying anthropomorphic
  labels to them, like loyalty, desire to please, or spite, is a _bad model_
  of their behavior.  A much _better model_ is that they are amoral, do what
  works to avoid unpleasantness and get motivators, and are very adept at
  learning what works from repeated trials.  Accepting this and moving on
  makes for much happier dogs and people.

The first two thirds of the book is a good read for anyone.  The last few
chapters deal with the nuts and bolts of training exercises, which are quite
good.  They are broken into education levels – there is a “kindergarten
sit/stay,” a “primary school sit/stay,” a “college-level sit/stay,” and
so on.  There are even some suggested dissertations at the end.

### Common Themes

There were a few things that came up over and over again.

- **Crate training**: This worked very well for Ada, and is unanimously
  recommended with the exception of Dunbar, who offers it as an option.  The
  recommendation is consistently to make the crate a wonderful place for the
  dog, and the payoff is greaet – the dog never gets a chance to get up to no
  good when left alone, and can be left in a place that isn't distressing.
- **Positive reinforcement training**: The best way to train a dog is by giving
  some kind of reward when they do the right thing.  The reward is far more
  important than the actual command or cue you use, and it's important and
  difficult to remember that dogs will never guess what you want based on the
  English meaning of a cue.
- **Generalizing is hard for dogs**: A dog that learns to sit only in the living
  room might not sit on the sidewalk.  A dog that learns the command “up”
  for going up stairs might not be able to use it to jump in the car, or even
  go up a different set of stairs.  Dogs need to be given lots of examples
  with different contextual cues to distinguish what's the same and what's
  incidental to the activity.
- **Excercise is the best obedience tool**: Dogs that don't get enough exercise
  burn off their energy in other ways.  Other ways include destroying
  property, eating out of the trash, jumping on the couch, running around the
  house, and soliciting play by nibbling on your arm.


### Conflicts

Not all the books agree; in general, we tried to take the advice in the
intersection of the books that didn't have any direct contradictions.  But
there are a few areas where the books disagree.

- **Handling Scary Stuff**: Does a treat during a scary/stressed moment
  reinforce the scary/stressed moment or make the dog feel more comfortable
  with the scary thing?  The monks are clear that giving a dog reassurance
  during a scary event reinforces their whimpering, crying, or retreating
  behavior.  Other books didn't say explicitly one way or another, but another
  inference to draw is that giving a treat would cause a positive
  reinforcement with the event rather than with the dog's action.
- **Using Force**: Should we use physical punishments at all or not?  Was
  holding Ada's mouth shut as feedback on the “no-biting” rule a mistake?
  Sometimes you just do need to restrain a dog.  How should that be done so
  the dog doesn't end up afraid of you?  These are touchy topics and a frank
  treatment of them would be useful; a sort of “How and When to Physically
  Coerce Your Dog.”
- **Pack Theory**: Do dogs actually understand pack ordering?  Dunbar and
  Donaldson say no; the monks and McConnell say yes.  It seems like Dunbar and
  Donaldson have slightly more recent research cited, but citations in general
  are a little thin across the board, and I haven't done a deep literature
  search, or figure out if recent means good in this context.

### Some Conclusions

If I were to recommend books to a new dog owner, I'd recommend _After You Get
Your Puppy_ and _The Culture Clash_.  For non-dog-owners, I'd recommend _The
Other End of the Leash_ and _The Culture Clash_.

If you really like reading and have a dog, I'd read them all, though it might
be worth skipping Cesar Millan's book, I really don't think it added much
beyond what was covered in the others.

