---
layout: blog
published: true
future: true
title: "High Standards, Multiple Tries: Illinois Summer Teaching Workshop 2024"
---

<h2><a href="{{ site.url }}{{ page.url }}">{{ page.title }}</a></h2>

This page is for resources for the talk “High Standards, Multiple Tries – How I've Been Grading”.

Abstract: Supporting students who miss coursework or get off to a bad start
presents many challenges. Extending deadlines, giving retakes, or creating
alternate assignments strains course staff with rescheduling and regrading;
further, judging which student situations warrant these extra opportunities is
fraught. Curving course grades or exam grades, dropping lowest assignments,
deciding grade cutoffs post hoc, and more fuel a perception of eroding rigor
(justified or not). 
 
In this talk I present how I've tried to make progress on this in my courses,
at scale, over the past few years. I've used a mix of technological solutions,
syllabus design decisions, staff training, and student communication. The
primary design consideration is twofold: clearly articulating course outcomes
and their mappings to activities, and assuming that most students will need
more than one try on many course activities (to sloganize: “high standards,
multiple tries”). From these principles, we design resubmission and regrade
systems, a retake strategy for exams, and an overall grading policy that gives
me straightforward replies to the vast majority of “exceptional” student
situations and doesn't make me feel like I'm compromising on assessment.


Slides: [pptx](/docs/high-standards-multiple-tries.pptx)

Several course websites that use (variants of) the grading scheme I mentioned:

- [https://ucsd-cse15l-w24.github.io/#grading](https://ucsd-cse15l-w24.github.io/#grading) (This is specifically the instance from the talk)
  - That link goes directly to “Grading”, but overall policies for skill
    demonstrations, lab reports, and some sample skill demos are linked from
    that page
  - Individual week links from the sidebar have lab report descriptions
- [https://ucsd-cse15l-f23.github.io/syllabus/#grading](https://ucsd-cse15l-f23.github.io/syllabus/#grading)
- [https://ucsd-compilers-s23.github.io](https://ucsd-compilers-s23.github.io)

This paper (though not about CSE15L, which was featured in the talk), describes
a “two tries” exam strategy from our accelerated intro course, also in the
spirit of the talk:

[Stream your exam to the course staff](https://jpolitz.github.io/docs/sigcse-2023-video-exams.pdf)


